

From ancient times to the modern day, astronomy has played an important role in all cultures and eras.
Questions about the nature of the infinite cosmos and our place in it have intrigued great minds for millennia.
In researching the cosmos, astrophysicists try to comprehend the vast scale of the universe, both spatial and temporally.
Astronomers have to develop instruments that can tap into this ocean of cosmic data and make sense of the flood of information that results.

Each new drop of cosmic data obtained improves our understanding of the universe.

Yet the challenge of


Exploration of the Milky Way has always been in the spotlight of these endeavours
to understand the Universe, as our home Galaxy represents an ideal laboratory
to test our hypotheses about astrophysical phenomena.




During the last decade, a wealth of new large-scale surveys have come online
across the world.


These huge spectral, astrometric and photometric surveys are providing astronomers with the richest datasets to date, to better characterise stars contained within the Milky Way like never before. Not only are these resources used to
better understand the formation and evolution of our Galaxy and the stars contained
within it, but these surveys can also be used to better understand the exoplanets found
within the Milky Way. More planets are now being discovered in our galaxy, thanks
largely to NASA’s new exoplanetary mission, the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS). TESS has been operating since 2018, with an unprecedented number of
stars being observed to monitor transit signals of exoplanets around nearby stars.




From ancient times to the modern day, astronomy has played an important role in all cultures and eras.
Questions about the nature of the infinite cosmos and our place in it have intrigued great minds for millennia.



Democritus (460 - 370 BC) suggested for the first time that the night sky consisted of a vast number
of distant and unresolved stars.

Centuries later, in 1610, Galileo Galilei turned his telescope toward the sky
and then it became clear that Democritus was right: the filmy glow was nothing but the light of billions and
billions of stars too faint to be seen individually.

He realized that if the stars were like the Sun, they had
to be at vast distances because of the range of brightnesses he could observe.

For several hundred years
after Galileo, astronomers have tried to map out the stars in the Milky Way.

William Herschel, in 1785, was
the first to start counting stars in order to make a map and measure the distribution of stars in space. And,
somehow, we are still counting today


From ancient times to the modern day, astronomy has always played an important role in all cultures and eras.
Questions about the nature of the infinite cosmos and our place in it have intrigued great minds for millennia.

Exploration of the Milky Way has always been in the spotlight of these endeavours
to understand the Universe, as our home Galaxy represents an ideal laboratory
to test our hypotheses about astrophysical phenomena.

Our knowledge of the Milky Way has evolved spectacularly over the centuries
and is currently relatively extensive. We have a good understanding of various
components of our Galaxy, our position in it and in the Local Group.

However,
there are still many questions that remain unanswered.

The full picture of how
our Galaxy was formed, how it will evolve and how is it connected to other
galaxies is a complicated puzzle, whose pieces are being put together by a great
group effort of scientists all around the world.


We now know that the Milky Way is a spiral galaxy consisting of a bulge
and/or a bar, a disc with several spiral arms and a stellar halo (see Figure 1.1),
extending out to a radius of ∼30 kpc and containing about 100 billion stars. It
is also believed that the Milky Way has a dark matter halo with radius of some
290 kpc (Deason et al. 2020).

Our position in the Milky Way is ∼8.3 kpc from
the Galactic centre (Gillessen et al. 2017).

In this section, we briefly review research on the Milky Way throughout
history, which will lead us to open questions and build the motivation for the
thesis.
1








In researching the cosmos, astrophysicists face a unique challenge: the vast scale of the universe itself, in terms of both its physical size and the timeline of its existence. Further, telltale traces of the entire history of the universe are still extant; because the cosmos is so transparent, almost all of the radiation that has ever been emitted continues to travel through space. Yet these challenges also offer tremendous promise. The trick for researchers will be to develop instruments that can tap into this ocean of cosmic data and make sense of the flood of information that results.

Astronomy has always been data driven, but innovative instruments, global digital archives, and new analytical tools are turning astronomy into a true big-data science, as many articles in this special issue explain. The European Space Agency’s Gaia satellite ("Gaia Reveals the Milky Way") is currently measuring the positions and motions of more than a billion stars in the Milky Way; it will eventually make possible the most comprehensive map of our home galaxy ever created. Together, all of the world’s telescopes discover a few thousand supernovas each year, but the "Large Synoptic Survey Telescope" under construction in Chile will discover many more than that every single night. New technology can even lead to completely different ways of perceiving what is out there. For instance, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) detectors can record gravitational waves from merging black holes and neutron stars ("Gravitational Wave Astronomy").


Photograph by Gregory Lambert/ESO.

With this flood of data, we can test theories as never before and develop a more sophisticated understanding of the universe on all scales. In addition, astronomical data rapidly become public, fostering collaboration among scientists "Why Do Galaxies Start Out as Cosmic Pickles?"). And these public data have another advantage: They create excitement. With the abundance of citizen science projects underway, anyone can be an amateur astronomer ("STEVE and the Citizen Scientists").

The amount of astronomical data is growing so rapidly that human brains cannot keep up. Fortunately, researchers are developing artificial intelligence that can recognize patterns and details that would otherwise elude us. In an article in the online component of this issue ("Deep Learning"), my colleague Marc Huertas-Company describes our “face recognition for galaxies” project, which applies deep learning technology on a cosmic scale. And just as such methods developed for computer science can be applied to astrophysics, new big data technologies coming out of the astrophysical field can lead to advances in other areas of science. (See the President’s Letter for more about big data research across scientific fields.)

Computers can help us analyze scientific data and find correlations, but the ultimate significance of all these data is that they fuel the human imagination—and by extension, they inspire the ideas that will lead to new tools, new observations, and new, even deeper insights into the nature of the cosmos. And although novel scientific results seem to come in daily, the big data era is sparking new questions at an unprecedented rate. We still don’t know what dark matter is or what dark energy is, and we don’t know the first thing about the landscapes on planets orbiting other stars. The big data era is just the first small step toward a kind of exploration that we can scarcely imagine. —Joel Primack, President of Sigma Xi, and professor of physics and astrophysics at the University of California, Santa Cruz




The universe has been 


With an inordinate amount of data being produced using modern instruments, astronomy has become more data driven than ever before. 

Modern astronomy finds its basis in the streams of data delivered by ground and space-based telescopes across all wavelengths with frontiers emerging in the field of neutrino physics, high-energy astrophysics, and gravitational waves. With the enormous amount of data funnelling through the observational centres or high-end simulations, knowledge processing and accumulation in astronomy is growing exponentially. However, it took more than three long decades for us to cross the threshold of technology-driven science. 



An accelerating amount of data is now being received to help us understand the physical universe. With the advent of the internet age and the establishment of public data archives, we have also democratised data access and its processing. This coming of age in astronomy not only revolutionized it but also led to a paradigm shift in the nature of astronomical research and its method over the turn of the last century.



Evolving from location and laboratory-intensive research to global collaborative data-driven projects, the world has come quite far.  We are in the transition into the ever-evolving new. This also gives us an opportunity to archives, assess, and communicate the becoming of data-driven astronomy from the 1980s until now. It is the historicization of such intense research material over these decades that makes us understand the intellectual movement in the field but also helps us assess emerging fields like astroinformatics.  The gradual shift from analogue to digital observational methods led to the shift in data-collection regimes. Astronomers have moved from photographic, and electronic, to born-digital data, which moved the discovery away from the telescope itself to hard drives and data archives. This not only becomes a study in the history of technology but also an intellectual history of knowledge networks and global collaborations.  



With the proposed project we intend to archive this gradual shift and intellectual underpinnings of the evolution of astronomical knowledge processing through data-driven methods across the globe.  Two primary perspectives that hold the project together are how the efforts of astronomers to integrate computers into their research endeavours and started collecting data digitally created a new realm of astrophysical research, and how the making of new-age instruments for observational astronomy created innovative methods of investigation that required data processing. This is looked into as a study in the evolution and contextual relevance of bigger chips, CCDs, global interconnectedness, faster internet/bandwidth, more powerful computational processing, and especially how sky surveys allow us to repeat observations over several observational spectrums.  



The project places this evolution also in the context of the variable processes of social and cultural interaction within and outside the community in the past several decades. 